%{
  title: "How does UPI work ? A Technical Perspective.",
  tags: ~w(payments how india),
  description: "Learn about UPI works under the hood. What happens when you send money to your friends, how payments are handled at the merchant level as well.",
  draft: true
}
---

UPI or United Payments Interface is the ubiquitous payment method in India. Learn how it works under the hood.

## The User Experience of UPI
If you haven't used UPI and have only heard about it, this is how the UPI works.

* The Payer (person who wants to pay) opens up their UPI app and enters the UPI Id or scans the QR code of the Payee (person who receives the payment)
* The Payer then enters the amount and selects the bank account that they want to send the money from
* The UPI app then asks for the UPI pin and in around three seconds the money is sent.


## How a UPI transaction takes place.
Rather than go through the entire terms of the ecosystem, let's start with two people who wants to make a UPI transaction and build it from first principles. 

In the true spirit of Indian Government ads, let's start with Ramu and Damu. Ramu wants to send Damu Rs.100. Let's see how the transaction takes place from the first step to the last step and we'll introduce the different entities along the way. We'll introduce different UPI concepts and how it works along the transaction.


## The world of Ramu and Damu
Before we start with the transaction, let's establish the world where Ramu and Damu lives in. Ramu and Damu are living in India. Ramu has an account with SBI and Damu has an account with Yes Bank. Ramu and Damu both has an account balance of Rs.1000.


## Ramu sets up UPI
Damu had lend Rs.100 Ramu for his son's birthday and Ramu decided to pay Damu via UPI. Ramu doesn't have UPI setup yet. So he goes on the Play Store to download a UPI app to send the payment.

### UPI Apps
UPI Apps are the consumer facing side of the UPI network. Users interact with the network through these Apps. Only regulated Banks are allowed to interface with the UPI network. This means only banking apps and third party apps with backing of banks can connect to the UPI network. Each app may be backed by multiple banks and have unique handles per backing. CRED is backed by Axis bank and Google Pay is backed by multiple banks. BHIM is the official app released with UPI. You can find a list of approved apps and their connected banks here, https://www.npci.org.in/what-we-do/upi/3rd-party-apps. They are called **Third Party Application Providers, TPAPs**.

#### Payment Service Provider - PSP
The banks which provide these services are called Payment Service Providers. PSP onboards the users, authenticates the user during registration, ensures the TPAPs are compliant and secure, and give grievance redressal mechanism for resolving complaints. PSP which onboarded Ramu is called the **Payer PSP**, and PSP which onboarded Damu is called the **Payee PSP**.

Damu decides to go with Google Pay and downloads the app. He sets up the App and starts the Registration process.

### Registration process
To start using UPI, the user must have a bank account and a debit card linked to that bank account. The mobile number used for registration should also be linked to the Bank account. During registration the app sends an SMS to the servers with a one-time code generated by the App. This identifies the linked bank account and the user can then set it up from there. UPI transactions require two-factor authentication, hence a UPI Pin needs to be setup as well. Even though the registration process is handled by the PSP, setting the UPI pin and it's authentication is handled by the bank that has the user's account.

Now Ramu has setup his UPI account and is now ready to send his payment to Damu.


## Finding Damu
Ramu now needs to find Damu on the UPI network so the money reaches him safely. Unlike the by-gone days, we do not need the account number and the IFSC code to send the payment, we need the unique VPA that is generated during UPI signup to send and recieve money.

### VPA - Virtual Payment Address
Every person on the UPI network will have a unique address identifying them. The VPA is a combination of a user identifier and an entity identifier that identifies the issuing bank separated by a `@` symbol, like `ramu@sbi` and `damu@yes`. The VPA uniquely identifies the UPI account. A single bank account can have multiple VPA's associated with them. A VPA can have multiple banks accounts associated with them, but one is required to be primary.

Damu sends his VPA to Ramu and he opens up his UPI app to send Rs.100 to Damu's account.


## Ramu sends Rs.100 to Damu
Ramu enters the VPA Id and the amount on his UPI app, enters his UPI pin and starts the payment process. The TPAP sends the request to the Payer Bank which forwards it to the central UPI switch hosted at **NPCI**.

### National Payments Corportion of India, NPCI
The National Payments Corportion of India is a RBI established organization that handles multiple payment and settlement systems in India. In additional to operating the technical infrastructure, the organization is responsible for setting the rules and guidelines for all parties integrating with the system. They are also responsible for audits and managing the third party integrations. They also handle transaction routing, settlement and dispute management. NPCI also operates the UPI Switch, a bunch of servers to handle UPI transactions.

The UPI Switch then finds the Payee PSP from the VPA id and routes the transaction to the corresponding PSP of Damu. The Payee PSP validates the request and returns the account details of Damu back to NPCI.


## Moving the Money
Now the UPI Switch knows Ramu's and Damu's account details which it got from the corresponding PSPs and the amount to be transferred. Since UPI is a realtime system the transfer of money takes place with the transaction itself, unlike card transactions where the money moves at the end of the day. Now it's upto the UPI switch to move the money from Ramu's **Remitter Bank Account** to Damu's **Beneficiary Bank Account**. The UPI Switch forwards the request to the **Remitter Bank** ie Ramu's Bank.


### Remitter Bank, Ramu's Bank
The Remitter Bank refers to the Bank from which the payment originates. The Remitter bank in in charge of authenticating the UPI pin as well.

The request from the **UPI Switch** contains the account details of the person making the payment. The **Remitter Bank** authenticates the **UPI Pin** and if it matches, debits the amount and sends the request back to UPI Switch. Ramu's bank account has currently a balance of Rs.900. The debited money is credited to the **Beneficiary Bank** in realtime through **IMPS**.

### Beneficiary Bank, Damu's Bank
Beneficiary Bank refers to the Bank to which the money will be credited. The UPI request contains the amount and the bank details that was fetches from the Payee PSP. Once the money reaches Beneficiary bank, the corresponding account is credited and an acknowledgement is returned.

### Immediate Payment Service, IMPS
IMPS is an interbank realtime payment system managed by NPCI in India. It is built on top of the National Financial Switch. IMPS is available 24x7 including Bank holidays. To send money through IMPS, you need to know the account number and the IFSC code. The UPI request gets these values from the PSP and sends the money through IMPS. 

Once the money has reached Dam's Bank, his account is credited Rs.100 and his balance becomes Rs.1100 the bank sends an acknowledgement back to the UPI switch. The success message is then forwarded to the Payer PSP which forwards it to Ramu's UPI App, which shows the transaction as succesful. Ramu gets an SMS from the Bank about the debited money and Damu gets an SMS from the bank about the credited money.

## Ramu and Damu is happy
That is how a UPI transaction happens from start to finish. The amount of technical infrastructure holding everything up in place is phenomenal, and I have massive respect for the people who came up and runs these systems reliably for an entire Nation.


## Failure Points
Since UPI touches multiple places, it has multiple modes of failure. It requires multiple entities to be online at the time of the payment, and since payment settles in realtime.


## Resources
* UPI Product Booklet - https://www.npci.org.in/PDF/npci/upi/Product-Booklet.pdf
* Roles and Responsibilities of NPCI, PSP and TPAP in UPI -  https://pay.google.com/intl/en_in/about/external/npci/
* National Payments Corporation India, NPCI - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Payments_Corporation_of_India
* Immediate Payment Service, IMPS - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immediate_Payment_Service
